'It all arose, you must know, from Andrey being fond of a drop of drink
at that time--though he's a sober enough man now by all account, so much
the better for him.  Jane, his bride, you see, was somewhat older than
Andrey; how much older I don't pretend to say; she was not one of our
parish, and the register alone may be able to tell that.  But, at any
rate, her being a little ahead of her young man in mortal years, coupled
with other bodily circumstances--'

('Ah, poor thing!' sighed the women.)

'--made her very anxious to get the thing done before he changed his
mind; and 'twas with a joyful countenance (they say) that she, with
Andrey and his brother and sister-in-law, marched off to church one
November morning as soon as 'twas day a'most, to be made one with Andrey
for the rest of her life.  He had left our place long before it was
light, and the folks that were up all waved their lanterns at him, and
flung up their hats as he went.

'The church of her parish was a mile and more from the houses, and, as it
was a wonderful fine day for the time of year, the plan was that as soon
as they were married they would make out a holiday by driving straight
off to Port Bredy, to see the ships and the sea and the sojers, instead
of coming back to a meal at the house of the distant relation she lived
wi', and moping about there all the afternoon.

'Well, some folks noticed that Andrey walked with rather wambling steps
to church that morning; the truth o't was that his nearest neighbour's
child had been christened the day before, and Andrey, having stood
godfather, had stayed all night keeping up the christening, for he had
said to himself, "Not if I live to be thousand shall I again be made a
godfather one day, and a husband the next, and perhaps a father the next,
and therefore I'll make the most of the blessing."  So that when he
started from home in the morning he had not been in bed at all.  The
result was, as I say, that when he and his bride-to-he walked up the
church to get married, the pa'son (who was a very strict man inside the
church, whatever he was outside) looked hard at Andrey, and said, very
sharp:

'"How's this, my man?  You are in liquor.  And so early, too.  I'm
ashamed of you!"

'"Well, that's true, sir," says Andrey.  "But I can walk straight enough
for practical purposes.  I can walk a chalk line," he says (meaning no
offence), "as well as some other folk: and--" (getting hotter)--"I reckon
that if you, Pa'son Billy Toogood, had kept up a christening all night so
thoroughly as I have done, you wouldn't be able to stand at all; d--- me
if you would!"

'This answer made Pa'son Billy--as they used to call him--rather spitish,
not to say hot, for he was a warm-tempered man if provoked, and he said,
very decidedly: "Well, I cannot marry you in this state; and I will not!
Go home and get sober!"  And he slapped the book together like a
rat-trap.

'Then the bride burst out crying as if her heart would break, for very
fear that she would lose Andrey after all her hard work to get him, and
begged and implored the pa'son to go on with the ceremony.  But no.

'"I won't be a party to your solemnizing matrimony with a tipsy man,"
says Mr. Toogood.  "It is not right and decent.  I am sorry for you, my
young woman, but you'd better go home again.  I wonder how you could
think of bringing him here drunk like this!"

'"But if--if he don't come drunk he won't come at all, sir!" she says,
through her sobs.

'"I can't help that," says the pa'son; and plead as she might, it did not
move him.  Then she tried him another way.

'"Well, then, if you'll go home, sir, and leave us here, and come back to
the church in an hour or two, I'll undertake to say that he shall be as
sober as a judge," she cries.  "We'll bide here, with your permission;
for if he once goes out of this here church unmarried, all Van Amburgh's
horses won't drag him back again!"

'"Very well," says the parson.  "I'll give you two hours, and then I'll
return."

'"And please, sir, lock the door, so that we can't escape!" says she.

'"Yes," says the parson.

'"And let nobody know that we are here."

'The pa'son then took off his clane white surplice, and went away; and
the others consulted upon the best means for keeping the matter a secret,
which it was not a very hard thing to do, the place being so lonely, and
the hour so early.  The witnesses, Andrey's brother and brother's wife,
neither one o' which cared about Andrey's marrying Jane, and had come
rather against their will, said they couldn't wait two hours in that hole
of a place, wishing to get home to Longpuddle before dinner-time.  They
were altogether so crusty that the clerk said there was no difficulty in
their doing as they wished.  They could go home as if their brother's
wedding had actually taken place and the married couple had gone onward
for their day's pleasure jaunt to Port Bredy as intended, he, the clerk,
and any casual passer-by would act as witnesses when the pa'son came
back.

'This was agreed to, and away Andrey's relations went, nothing loath, and
the clerk shut the church door and prepared to lock in the couple.  The
bride went up and whispered to him, with her eyes a-streaming still.

'"My dear good clerk," she says, "if we bide here in the church, folk may
see us through the winders, and find out what has happened; and 'twould
cause such a talk and scandal that I never should get over it: and
perhaps, too, dear Andrey might try to get out and leave me!  Will ye
lock us up in the tower, my dear good clerk?" she says.  "I'll tole him
in there if you will."

'The clerk had no objection to do this to oblige the poor young woman,
and they toled Andrey into the tower, and the clerk locked 'em both up
straightway, and then went home, to return at the end of the two hours.

'Pa'son Toogood had not been long in his house after leaving the church
when he saw a gentleman in pink and top-boots ride past his windows, and
with a sudden flash of heat he called to mind that the hounds met that
day just on the edge of his parish.  The pa'son was one who dearly loved
sport, and much he longed to be there.

'In short, except o' Sundays and at tide-times in the week, Pa'son Billy
was the life o' the Hunt.  'Tis true that he was poor, and that he rode
all of a heap, and that his black mare was rat-tailed and old, and his
tops older, and all over of one colour, whitey-brown, and full o' cracks.
But he'd been in at the death of three thousand foxes.  And--being a
bachelor man--every time he went to bed in summer he used to open the bed
at bottom and crawl up head foremost, to mind 'em of the coming winter and
the good sport he'd have, and the foxes going to earth.  And whenever
there was a christening at the Squire's, and he had dinner there
afterwards, as he always did, he never failed to christen the chiel over
again in a bottle of port wine.

'Now the clerk was the parson's groom and gardener and jineral manager,
and had just got back to his work in the garden when he, too, saw the
hunting man pass, and presently saw lots more of 'em, noblemen and
gentry, and then he saw the hounds, the huntsman, Jim Treadhedge, the
whipper-in, and I don't know who besides.  The clerk loved going to cover
as frantical as the pa'son, so much so that whenever he saw or heard the
pack he could no more rule his feelings than if they were the winds of
heaven.  He might be bedding, or he might be sowing--all was forgot.  So
he throws down his spade and rushes in to the pa'son, who was by this
time as frantical to go as he.

'"That there mare of yours, sir, do want exercise bad, very bad, this
morning!" the clerk says, all of a tremble.  "Don't ye think I'd better
trot her round the downs for an hour, sir?"

'"To be sure, she does want exercise badly.  I'll trot her round myself,"
says the parson.

'"Oh--you'll trot her yerself?  Well, there's the cob, sir.  Really that
cob is getting oncontrollable through biding in a stable so long!  If you
wouldn't mind my putting on the saddle--"

'"Very well.  Take him out, certainly," says the pa'son, never caring
what the clerk did so long as he himself could get off immediately.  So,
scrambling into his riding-boots and breeches as quick as he could, he
rode off towards the meet, intending to be back in an hour.  No sooner
was he gone than the clerk mounted the cob, and was off after him.  When
the pa'son got to the meet, he found a lot of friends, and was as jolly
as he could be: the hounds found a'most as soon as they threw off, and
there was great excitement.  So, forgetting that he had meant to go back
at once, away rides the pa'son with the rest o' the hunt, all across the
fallow ground that lies between Lippet Wood and Green's Copse; and as he
galloped he looked behind for a moment, and there was the clerk close to
his heels.

'"Ha, ha, clerk--you here?" he says.

'"Yes, sir, here be I," says t'other.

'"Fine exercise for the horses!"

'"Ay, sir--hee, hee!" says the clerk.

'So they went on and on, into Green's Copse, then across to Higher
Jirton; then on across this very turnpike-road to Climmerston Ridge, then
away towards Yalbury Wood: up hill and down dale, like the very wind, the
clerk close to the pa'son, and the pa'son not far from the hounds.  Never
was there a finer run knowed with that pack than they had that day; and
neither pa'son nor clerk thought one word about the unmarried couple
locked up in the church tower waiting to get j'ined.

'"These hosses of yours, sir, will be much improved by this!" says the
clerk as he rode along, just a neck behind the pa'son.  "'Twas a happy
thought of your reverent mind to bring 'em out to-day.  Why, it may be
frosty in a day or two, and then the poor things mid not be able to leave
the stable for weeks."

'"They may not, they may not, it is true.  A merciful man is merciful to
his beast," says the pa'son.

'"Hee, hee!" says the clerk, glancing sly into the pa'son's eye.

'"Ha, ha!" says the pa'son, a-glancing back into the clerk's.  "Halloo!"
he shouts, as he sees the fox break cover at that moment.

'"Halloo!" cries the clerk.  "There he goes!  Why, dammy, there's two
foxes--"

'"Hush, clerk, hush!  Don't let me hear that word again!  Remember our
calling."

'"True, sir, true.  But really, good sport do carry away a man so, that
he's apt to forget his high persuasion!"  And the next minute the corner
of the clerk's eye shot again into the corner of the pa'son's, and the
pa'son's back again to the clerk's.  "Hee, hee!" said the clerk.

'"Ha, ha!" said Pa'son Toogood.

'"Ah, sir," says the clerk again, "this is better than crying Amen to
your Ever-and-ever on a winter's morning!"

'"Yes, indeed, clerk!  To everything there's a season," says Pa'son
Toogood, quite pat, for he was a learned Christian man when he liked, and
had chapter and ve'se at his tongue's end, as a pa'son should.

'At last, late in the day, the hunting came to an end by the fox running
into a' old woman's cottage, under her table, and up the clock-case.  The
pa'son and clerk were among the first in at the death, their faces
a-staring in at the old woman's winder, and the clock striking as he'd
never been heard to strik' before.  Then came the question of finding
their way home.

'Neither the pa'son nor the clerk knowed how they were going to do this,
for their beasts were wellnigh tired down to the ground.  But they
started back-along as well as they could, though they were so done up
that they could only drag along at a' amble, and not much of that at a
time.

'"We shall never, never get there!" groaned Mr. Toogood, quite bowed
down.

'"Never!" groans the clerk.  "'Tis a judgment upon us for our
iniquities!"

'"I fear it is," murmurs the pa'son.

'Well, 'twas quite dark afore they entered the pa'sonage gate, having
crept into the parish as quiet as if they'd stole a hammer, little
wishing their congregation to know what they'd been up to all day long.
And as they were so dog-tired, and so anxious about the horses, never
once did they think of the unmarried couple.  As soon as ever the horses
had been stabled and fed, and the pa'son and clerk had had a bit and a
sup theirselves, they went to bed.

'Next morning when Pa'son Toogood was at breakfast, thinking of the
glorious sport he'd had the day before, the clerk came in a hurry to the
door and asked to see him.

'"It has just come into my mind, sir, that we've forgot all about the
couple that we was to have married yesterday!"

'The half-chawed victuals dropped from the pa'son's mouth as if he'd been
shot.  "Bless my soul," says he, "so we have!  How very awkward!"

'"It is, sir; very.  Perhaps we've ruined the 'ooman!"

'"Ah--to be sure--I remember!  She ought to have been married before."

'"If anything has happened to her up in that there tower, and no doctor
or nuss--"

('Ah--poor thing!' sighed the women.)

'"--'twill be a quarter-sessions matter for us, not to speak of the
disgrace to the Church!"

'"Good God, clerk, don't drive me wild!" says the pa'son.  "Why the hell
didn't I marry 'em, drunk or sober!"  (Pa'sons used to cuss in them days
like plain honest men.)  "Have you been to the church to see what
happened to them, or inquired in the village?"

'"Not I, sir!  It only came into my head a moment ago, and I always like
to be second to you in church matters.  You could have knocked me down
with a sparrer's feather when I thought o't, sir; I assure 'ee you
could!"

'Well, the parson jumped up from his breakfast, and together they went
off to the church.

'"It is not at all likely that they are there now," says Mr. Toogood, as
they went; "and indeed I hope they are not.  They be pretty sure to have
'scaped and gone home."

'However, they opened the church-hatch, entered the churchyard, and
looking up at the tower, there they seed a little small white face at the
belfry-winder, and a little small hand waving.  'Twas the bride.

'"God my life, clerk," says Mr. Toogood, "I don't know how to face 'em!"
And he sank down upon a tombstone.  "How I wish I hadn't been so cussed
particular!"

'"Yes--'twas a pity we didn't finish it when we'd begun," the clerk said.
"Still, since the feelings of your holy priestcraft wouldn't let ye, the
couple must put up with it."

'"True, clerk, true!  Does she look as if anything premature had took
place?"

'"I can't see her no lower down than her arm-pits, sir."

'"Well--how do her face look?"

'"It do look mighty white!"

'"Well, we must know the worst!  Dear me, how the small of my back do
ache from that ride yesterday! . . . But to more godly business!"

'They went on into the church, and unlocked the tower stairs, and
immediately poor Jane and Andrey busted out like starved mice from a
cupboard, Andrey limp and sober enough now, and his bride pale and cold,
but otherwise as usual.

'"What," says the pa'son, with a great breath of relief, "you haven't
been here ever since?"

'"Yes, we have, sir!" says the bride, sinking down upon a seat in her
weakness.  "Not a morsel, wet or dry, have we had since!  It was
impossible to get out without help, and here we've stayed!"

'"But why didn't you shout, good souls?" said the pa'son.

'"She wouldn't let me," says Andrey.

'"Because we were so ashamed at what had led to it," sobs Jane.  "We felt
that if it were noised abroad it would cling to us all our lives!  Once
or twice Andrey had a good mind to toll the bell, but then he said: "No;
I'll starve first.  I won't bring disgrace on my name and yours, my
dear."  And so we waited and waited, and walked round and round; but
never did you come till now!"

'"To my regret!" says the parson.  "Now, then, we will soon get it over."

'"I--I should like some victuals," said Andrey, "'twould gie me courage
if it is only a crust o' bread and a' onion; for I am that leery that I
can feel my stomach rubbing against my backbone."

'"I think we had better get it done," said the bride, a bit anxious in
manner; "since we are all here convenient, too!"

'Andrey gave way about the victuals, and the clerk called in a second
witness who wouldn't be likely to gossip about it, and soon the knot was
tied, and the bride looked smiling and calm forthwith, and Andrey limper
than ever.

'"Now," said Pa'son Toogood, "you two must come to my house, and have a
good lining put to your insides before you go a step further."

'They were very glad of the offer, and went out of the churchyard by one
path while the pa'son and clerk went out by the other, and so did not
attract notice, it being still early.  They entered the rectory as if
they'd just come back from their trip to Port Bredy; and then they
knocked in the victuals and drink till they could hold no more.

'It was a long while before the story of what they had gone through was
known, but it was talked of in time, and they themselves laugh over it
now; though what Jane got for her pains was no great bargain after all.
'Tis true she saved her name.'

* * * * *

'Was that the same Andrey who went to the squire's house as one of the
Christmas fiddlers?' asked the seedsman.

'No, no,' replied Mr. Profitt, the schoolmaster.  'It was his father did
that.  Ay, it was all owing to his being such a man for eating and
drinking.'  Finding that he had the ear of the audience, the schoolmaster
continued without delay:--



OLD ANDREY'S EXPERIENCE AS A MUSICIAN


'I was one of the choir-boys at that time, and we and the players were to
appear at the manor-house as usual that Christmas week, to play and sing
in the hall to the squire's people and visitors (among 'em being the
archdeacon, Lord and Lady Baxby, and I don't know who); afterwards going,
as we always did, to have a good supper in the servants' hall.  Andrew
knew this was the custom, and meeting us when we were starting to go, he
said to us: "Lord, how I should like to join in that meal of beef, and
turkey, and plum-pudding, and ale, that you happy ones be going to just
now!  One more or less will make no difference to the squire.  I am too
old to pass as a singing boy, and too bearded to pass as a singing girl;
can ye lend me a fiddle, neighbours, that I may come with ye as a
bandsman?"

'Well, we didn't like to be hard upon him, and lent him an old one,
though Andrew knew no more of music than the Cerne Giant; and armed with
the instrument he walked up to the squire's house with the others of us
at the time appointed, and went in boldly, his fiddle under his arm.  He
made himself as natural as he could in opening the music-books and moving
the candles to the best points for throwing light upon the notes; and all
went well till we had played and sung "While shepherds watch," and "Star,
arise," and "Hark the glad sound."  Then the squire's mother, a tall
gruff old lady, who was much interested in church-music, said quite
unexpectedly to Andrew: "My man, I see you don't play your instrument
with the rest.  How is that?"

'Every one of the choir was ready to sink into the earth with concern at
the fix Andrew was in.  We could see that he had fallen into a cold
sweat, and how he would get out of it we did not know.

'"I've had a misfortune, mem," he says, bowing as meek as a child.
"Coming along the road I fell down and broke my bow."

'"Oh, I am sorry to hear that," says she.  "Can't it be mended?"

'"Oh no, mem," says Andrew.  "'Twas broke all to splinters."

'"I'll see what I can do for you," says she.

'And then it seemed all over, and we played "Rejoice, ye drowsy mortals
all," in D and two sharps.  But no sooner had we got through it than she
says to Andrew,

'"I've sent up into the attic, where we have some old musical
instruments, and found a bow for you."  And she hands the bow to poor
wretched Andrew, who didn't even know which end to take hold of.  "Now we
shall have the full accompaniment," says she.

'Andrew's face looked as if it were made of rotten apple as he stood in
the circle of players in front of his book; for if there was one person
in the parish that everybody was afraid of, 'twas this hook-nosed old
lady.  However, by keeping a little behind the next man he managed to
make pretence of beginning, sawing away with his bow without letting it
touch the strings, so that it looked as if he were driving into the tune
with heart and soul.  'Tis a question if he wouldn't have got through all
right if one of the squire's visitors (no other than the archdeacon)
hadn't noticed that he held the fiddle upside down, the nut under his
chin, and the tail-piece in his hand; and they began to crowd round him,
thinking 'twas some new way of performing.

'This revealed everything; the squire's mother had Andrew turned out of
the house as a vile impostor, and there was great interruption to the
harmony of the proceedings, the squire declaring he should have notice to
leave his cottage that day fortnight.  However, when we got to the
servants' hall there sat Andrew, who had been let in at the back door by
the orders of the squire's wife, after being turned out at the front by
the orders of the squire, and nothing more was heard about his leaving
his cottage.  But Andrew never performed in public as a musician after
that night; and now he's dead and gone, poor man, as we all shall be!'

* * * * *

'I had quite forgotten the old choir, with their fiddles and bass-viols,'
said the home-comer, musingly.  'Are they still going on the same as of
old?'

'Bless the man!' said Christopher Twink, the master-thatcher; 'why,
they've been done away with these twenty year.  A young teetotaler plays
the organ in church now, and plays it very well; though 'tis not quite
such good music as in old times, because the organ is one of them that go
with a winch, and the young teetotaler says he can't always throw the
proper feeling into the tune without wellnigh working his arms off.'

'Why did they make the change, then?'

'Well, partly because of fashion, partly because the old musicians got
into a sort of scrape.  A terrible scrape 'twas too--wasn't it, John?  I
shall never forget it--never!  They lost their character as officers of
the church as complete as if they'd never had any character at all.'

'That was very bad for them.'

'Yes.'  The master-thatcher attentively regarded past times as if they
lay about a mile off, and went on:--
